Post on opening (#85)
maelle/simplymaelle: content/post/2025-06-19-open-files-folders-websites/index.Rmd

---
title: "How to open files, folders, websites in R"
date: '2025-06-19'
slug: cover-modify-r-packages
output: hugodown::hugo_document
tags:
  - good practice
  - code style
  - useful functions
---

Coming to you from France, a post about [_Mise en place_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mise_en_place) for R projects.
In a less francophone phrasing: to get to work on something you have to open that thing, be it a script or a project or a website.
The easier that is, the faster you get to work.
In this post I'll show a roundup of R functions and related tools for opening scripts, projects and websites for yourself or on behalf of the users of your code.

_Many thanks to [Hannah Frick](https://www.frick.ws/) for providing inspiration for some items of this post!_

> ## Open any file in the editor: `utils::file.edit()`, {cli}

Reviewer: That `{cli}` is weirdly dangling there, maybe:
```suggestion
## Open any file in the editor: `utils::file.edit()` or styling with `{cli}`
```
or formatting instead of styling?

> If you write code that creates a file at `path` and then is supposed to open it for the user, no need for you to use, say, `rstudioapi::documentOpen(path)` that only works in [RStudio IDE](https://posit.co/products/open-source/rstudio/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you write code that creates a file at `path` and then is supposed to open it for the user, there is no need for you to use, say, `rstudioapi::documentOpen(path)` that only works in [RStudio IDE](https://posit.co/products/open-source/rstudio/).
```

You can use a base R function, `utils::file.edit()`!
It will open the path in the default editor.

> Without my setting up anything, in RStudio IDE that is RStudio IDE and in [Positron](https://drmowinckels.io/blog/2025/positron-debugging/) that is Positron.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without me setting up anything, that is the RStudio IDE when I'm already in RStudio and [Positron](https://drmowinckels.io/blog/2025/positron-debugging/) when I'm already in Positron.
```

From an R session in the terminal[^adventurous], that is the default editor of my system[^atom].

I was surprised to see that `usethis::edit_file()` uses an RStudio specific function when available:

```{r, eval=FALSE}
# https://github.com/r-lib/usethis/blob/4aa55e72ccca131df2d98fcd84fff66724d6250a/R/edit.R#L32C1-L36C4
if (rstudio_available() && rstudioapi::hasFun("navigateToFile")) {
  rstudioapi::navigateToFile(path)
} else {
  utils::file.edit(path)
}
```

According to the [commit that added this logic](https://github.com/r-lib/usethis/commit/9ab2582980f0f4a8a1d565dba00345ac7aa7e2a2) more than 7 years ago, "utils::file.edit opens in dialog" which I do not understand.
Maybe it's different depending on the OS? Maybe RStudio changed in the meantime?
Please tell me if you have any more information on this. :pray:

> In any case I really enjoy `file.edit()` in codebases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In any case, I really enjoy `file.edit()` in code bases.
```

```
> _"If the terminal supports ANSI hyperlinks (e.g. RStudio, iTerm2, etc.), then cli creates a clickable link that opens the file in RStudio or with the default app for the file type."_

[^adventurous]: Look how adventurous I was when preparing this post! Running R from a terminal!
[^atom]: Which is... [Atom](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom_(text_editor)), meaning I live in the past since its end-of-life occurred a few years ago. :ghost: I actually rarely use it.

## Open the script or test file of a script-test pair: `usethis::use_r()` and `usethis::use_test()`

Coming back to the wonderful usethis package, when you name your test files after your scripts as you should,
running [`usethis::use_test()`](https://r-pkgs.org/testing-basics.html#create-a-test) when focussed on an R script will open its test file, and conversely `usethis::use_r()` when focussed on a test file.
This is still how I switch between the two even if inside Positron.

## Open a project: `positron`, project launcher, {usethis}

This is all very good when within a project, but how do you enter your IDE in the first place?
How sad would it be to lose momentum before even launching a project?

> When I used RStudio IDE I would navigate to the folder of interest then double-click on the `.Rproj` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When I used the RStudio IDE, I would navigate to the folder of interest, then double-click on the `.Rproj` file.
```

Hannah Frick inspired me, when demoing Positron to me, to think a bit harder about how much I click. :sweat_smile:
I have adopted a more keyboard-based workflow since I switched to Positron, which I could have done with RStudio IDE.

One thing in particular that Hannah showed me that looks cool is the use of a [project launcher](https://positron.posit.co/rstudio-rproj-file.html#use-an-application-launcher).

Now, I myself still use the terminal. 

> For instance if I clone a repository[^usethis], I'll then open it with the `positron` command.

Reviewer: You probably added Positron to your path in the past, probably worth linking to https://positron.posit.co/add-to-path.html here.

> Another way to open projects I use a lot is, on Positron as on Rstudio, clicking to the recent projects -- when the IDE is already up and running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way to open projects that I use a lot, in Positron and RStudio, is to click on the recent projects when the IDE is already up and running.
```

> Unfortunately, I created and [currently](https://stateofther.netlify.app/post/saperlipopette/) [often](https://www.meetup.com/rbuenosaires/events/308338205/) use a [package that creates throwaway folders for practicing Git](https://docs.ropensci.org/saperlipopette/) which makes the list of recent projects utter rubbish. 🙃

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, I created and [currently](https://stateofther.netlify.app/post/saperlipopette/) [often](https://www.meetup.com/rbuenosaires/events/308338205/) use the [saperlipopette](https://docs.ropensci.org/saperlipopette/) package that creates throwaway folders for practicing Git.
This makes the list of recent projects utter rubbish. 🙃
```

Reviewer: Otherwise, the package name in the next sentence might be surprising to readers who don't know about it yet and didn't follow the links above

> Within saperlipopette itself, to create and open the exercice folder on behalf of the user I use `usethis::create_project()`, which handily opens it in Positron when run in Positron and RStudio when run in RStudio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within saperlipopette itself, to create and open the exercise folder on behalf of the user, I use `usethis::create_project()`, which handily opens it in Positron when run in Positron and in RStudio when run in RStudio.
```

[^usethis]: I know I could use `usethis::create_from_github()` and sometimes do but not always... Maybe the message of this post is that my workflows are a big mess.

> ## Open an URL in the browser: `browseURL()` and {cli}

Reviewer: The `{cli}` is less surprising than the first time round, but I would adapt this one in the same style if you change the first.

To open an URL in the default browser, you can use `utils::browseURL()`.
In all of the `usethis::browse_` functions, `utils::browseURL()` is what's used under the hood.
For instance:

```{r, eval=FALSE}
browseURL("https://masalmon.eu/post")
```

To make it easy to open an URL from a message, you can use the [URL class](https://cli.r-lib.org/reference/inline-markup.html#classes) of the cli package.
For instance:

```{r, eval=FALSE}
cli::cli_alert_info("Go read that blog! {.url https://masalmon.eu/post}!")
```

When getting that message, the user will simply have to click on the link to follow it (after trusting the domain in Positron).

## Open only in interactive sessions: `interactive()`, `rlang::is_interactive()`

If you use `utils::file.edit()` or `utils::browseURL()` in your code, you need to ensure the session is interactive.

Either

```{r, eval=FALSE}
if (interactive()) {
  file.edit("config.toml")
}
```

Or

```{r, eval=FALSE}
if (rlang::is_interactive()) {
  file.edit("config.toml")
}
```

Compared to `interactive()`, `rlang::is_interactive()` also checks whether knitr or testthat are in progress, and provides an escape hatch through the `rlang_interactive` option.

> All of usethis functions that try to open or browse something on behalf of the user behave differently based on `rlang::is_interactive()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of the usethis functions that try to open or browse something on behalf of the user behave differently based on `rlang::is_interactive()`.
```

[`usethis::edit_file()`'s source](https://github.com/r-lib/usethis/blob/4aa55e72ccca131df2d98fcd84fff66724d6250a/R/edit.R#L20),

> [`usethis::view_url()`'s source](https://github.com/r-lib/usethis/blob/4aa55e72ccca131df2d98fcd84fff66724d6250a/R/helpers.R#L107).

Reviewer: Are these supposed to be bullet points? Right now, they are sort of just squished there.

## Conclusion

> In this post I summarized some tools for opening scripts, projects, URLs for yourself or on behalf of your user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post I summarized some tools for opening scripts, projects, and URLs  - for yourself or on behalf of your user.
```

I'd like to add some words of conclusion beyond the summary table below,

> but after so much talk of opening, I have trouble **closing** this post. :grin:

Reviewer: 🥁
